After breakfast, Adele and I withdrew to the library, which room, it
appears, Mr Rochester had directed should be used as the schoolroom.
Most of the books were locked up behind glass doors but there was one
bookcase left open containing everything that could be needed in the way
of elementary works, and several volumes of light literature, poetry,
biography, travels, a few romances .I suppose he had considered that
these were all the governess would require for her private perusal and,
indeed, they contented me amply for the present; compared with the scanty
pickings I had now and then been able to glean at Lowood, they seemed to
offer an abundant harvest of entertainment and information.  In this
room, too, there was a cabinet piano, quite new and of superior tone
also an easel for painting and a pair of globes.

I found my pupil sufficiently docile, though disinclined to apply: she
had not been used to regular occupation of any kind.  I felt it would be
injudicious to confine her too much at first so, when I had talked to
her a great deal, and got her to learn a little, and when the morning had
advanced to noon, I allowed her to return to her nurse.  I then proposed
to occupy myself till dinner time in drawing some little sketches for her
use.

As I was going upstairs to fetch my portfolio and pencils, Mrs. Fairfax
called to me Your morning school hours are over now, I suppose, said
she.  She was in a room the folding doors of which stood open I went in
when she addressed me.  It was a large, stately apartment, with purple
chairs and curtains, a Turkey carpet, walnut panelled walls, one vast
window rich in slanted glass, and a lofty ceiling, nobly moulded.  Mrs.
Fairfax was dusting some vases of fine purple spar, which stood on a
sideboard.

What a beautiful room! I exclaimed, as I looked round for I had never
before seen any half so imposing.

Yes; this is the dining room.  I have just opened the window, to let in
a little air and sunshine for everything gets so damp in apartments that
are seldom inhabited the drawing room yonder feels like a vault.

She pointed to a wide arch corresponding to the window, and hung like it
with a Tyrian dyed curtain, now looped up.  Mounting to it by two broad
steps, and looking through, I thought I caught a glimpse of a fairy
place, so bright to my novice eyes appeared the view beyond.  Yet it was
merely a very pretty drawing room, and within it a boudoir, both spread
with white carpets, on which seemed laid brilliant garlands of flowers;
both ceiled with snowy mouldings of white grapes and vine leaves, beneath
which glowed in rich contrast crimson couches and ottomans while the
ornaments on the pale Parian mantelpiece were of sparkling Bohemian
glass, ruby red and between the windows large mirrors repeated the
general blending of snow and fire.

In what order you keep these rooms, Mrs Fairfax! said I.  No dust, no
canvas coverings except that the air feels chilly, one would think they
were inhabited daily.

Why, Miss Eyre, though Mr. Rochester's visits here are rare, they are
always sudden and unexpected and as I observed that it put him out to
find everything swathed up, and to have a bustle of arrangement on his
arrival, I thought it best to keep the rooms in readiness.


I don't know it is not easy to describe nothing striking, but you feel
it when he speaks to you; you cannot be always sure whether he is in jest
or earnest, whether he is pleased or the contrary you don't thoroughly
understand him, in short at least, I don't but it is of no consequence,
he is a very good master.

This was all the account I got from Mrs Fairfax of her employer and
mine.  There are people who seem to have no notion of sketching a
character, or observing and describing salient points, either in persons
or things the good lady evidently belonged to this class my queries
puzzled, but did not draw her out.  Mr Rochester was Mr Rochester in
her eyes a gentleman, a landed proprietor nothing more she inquired
and searched no further, and evidently wondered at my wish to gain a more
definite notion of his identity.

When we left the dining room, she proposed to show me over the rest of
the house and I followed her upstairs and downstairs, admiring as I
went for all was well arranged and handsome.  The large front chambers I
thought especially grand and some of the third storey rooms, though dark
and low, were interesting from their air of antiquity.  The furniture
once appropriated to the lower apartments had from time to time been
removed here, as fashions changed and the imperfect light entering by
their narrow casement showed bedsteads of a hundred years old; chests in
oak or walnut, looking, with their strange carvings of palm branches and
cherubs' heads, like types of the Hebrew ark rows of venerable chairs,
high backed and narrow stools still more antiquated, on whose cushioned
tops were yet apparent traces of half effaced embroideries, wrought by
fingers that for two generations had been coffin dust.  All these relics
gave to the third storey of Thornfield Hall the aspect of a home of the
past a shrine of memory.  I liked the hush, the gloom, the quaintness of
these retreats in the day but I by no means coveted a night's repose on
one of those wide and heavy beds shut in, some of them, with doors of
oak shaded, others, with wrought old English hangings crusted with thick
work, portraying effigies of strange flowers, and stranger birds, and
strangest human beings, all which would have looked strange, indeed, by
the pallid gleam of moonlight.

Do the servants sleep in these rooms? I asked.

No they occupy a range of smaller apartments to the back no one ever
sleeps here one would almost say that, if there were a ghost at
Thornfield Hall, this would be its haunt.

So I think you have no ghost, then?

None that I ever heard of, returned Mrs Fairfax, smiling.

Nor any traditions of one? no legends or ghost stories?

I believe not. And yet it is said the Rochesters have been rather a
violent than a quiet race in their time perhaps, though, that is the
reason they rest tranquilly in their graves now.

Yes  'after life's fitful fever they sleep well,' I muttered.  Where
are you going now, Mrs Fairfax? for she was moving away.

On to the leads will you come and see the view from thence?  I
followed still, up a very narrow staircase to the attics, and thence by a
ladder and through a trap door to the roof of the hall.  I was now on a
level with the crow colony, and could see into their nests.  Leaning over
the battlements and looking far down, I surveyed the grounds laid out
like a map the bright and velvet lawn closely girdling the grey base of
the mansion the field, wide as a park, dotted with its ancient timber
the wood, dun and sere, divided by a path visibly overgrown, greener with
moss than the trees were with foliage the church at the gates, the road,
the tranquil hills, all reposing in the autumn day's sun; the horizon
bounded by a propitious sky, azure, marbled with pearly white.  No
feature in the scene was extraordinary, but all was pleasing.  When I
turned from it and repassed the trap door, I could scarcely see my way
down the ladder the attic seemed black as a vault compared with that
arch of blue air to which I had been looking up, and to that sunlit scene
of grove, pasture, and green hill, of which the hall was the centre, and
over which I had been gazing with delight.

Mrs Fairfax stayed behind a moment to fasten the trap door I, by drift
of groping, found the outlet from the attic, and proceeded to descend the
narrow garret staircase.  I lingered in the long passage to which this
led, separating the front and back rooms of the third storey narrow,
low, and dim, with only one little window at the far end, and looking,
with its two rows of small black doors all shut, like a corridor in some
Bluebeard's castle.

While I paced softly on, the last sound I expected to hear in so still a
region, a laugh, struck my ear.  It was a curious laugh distinct,
formal, mirthless.  I stopped: the sound ceased, only for an instant it
began again, louder for at first, though distinct, it was very low.  It
passed off in a clamorous peal that seemed to wake an echo in every
lonely chamber though it originated but in one, and I could have pointed
out the door whence the accents issued.

Mrs Fairfax! I called out for I now heard her descending the great
stairs.  Did you hear that loud laugh?  Who is it?

Some of the servants, very likely, she answered perhaps Grace Poole.

Did you hear it? I again inquired.

Yes, plainly I often hear her: she sews in one of these rooms.
Sometimes Leah is with her they are frequently noisy together.

The laugh was repeated in its low, syllabic tone, and terminated in an
odd murmur.

Grace! exclaimed Mrs Fairfax.

I really did not expect any Grace to answer; for the laugh was as tragic,
as preternatural a laugh as any I ever heard and, but that it was high
noon, and that no circumstance of ghostliness accompanied the curious
cachinnation but that neither scene nor season favoured fear, I should
have been superstitiously afraid.  However, the event showed me I was a
fool for entertaining a sense even of surprise.

The door nearest me opened, and a servant came out,  a woman of between
thirty and forty a set, square made figure, red haired, and with a hard,
plain face any apparition less romantic or less ghostly could scarcely
be conceived.

Too much noise, Grace, said Mrs Fairfax  Remember directions!  Grace
curtseyed silently and went in.

She is a person we have to sew and assist Leah in her housemaid's work,
continued the widow not altogether unobjectionable in some points, but
she does well enough.  By the bye, how have you got on with your new
pupil this morning?

The conversation, thus turned on Adele, continued till we reached the
light and cheerful region below.  Adele came running to meet us in the
hall, exclaiming  

Mesdames, vous etes servies! adding, Jai bien fam, moi!

We found dinner ready, and waiting for us in Mrs. Fairfax's room.






The promise of a smooth career, which my first calm introduction to
Thornfield Hall seemed to pledge, was not belied on a longer acquaintance
with the place and its inmates.  Mrs Fairfax turned out to be what she
appeared, a placid tempered, kind natured woman, of competent education
and average intelligence.  My pupil was a lively child, who had been
spoilt and indulged, and therefore was sometimes wayward but as she was
committed entirely to my care, and no injudicious interference from any
quarter ever thwarted my plans for her improvement, she soon forgot her
little freaks, and became obedient and teachable.  She had no great
talents, no marked traits of character, no peculiar development of
feeling or taste which raised her one inch above the ordinary level of
childhood but neither had she any deficiency or vice which sunk her
below it.  She made reasonable progress, entertained for me a vivacious,
though perhaps not very profound, affection and by her simplicity, gay
prattle, and efforts to please, inspired me, in return, with a degree of
attachment sufficient to make us both content in each other's society.

This, parentheses , will be thought cool language by persons who
entertain solemn doctrines about the angelic nature of children, and the
duty of those charged with their education to conceive for them an
idolatrous devotion but I am not writing to flatter parental egotism, to
echo cant, or prop up humbug I am merely telling the truth.  I felt a
conscientious solicitude for Adele's welfare and progress, and a quiet
liking for her little self just as I cherished towards Mrs Fairfax a
thankfulness for her kindness, and a pleasure in her society
proportionate to the tranquil regard she had for me, and the moderation
of her mind and character.

Anybody may blame me who likes, when I add further, that, now and then,
when I took a walk by myself in the grounds when I went down to the
gates and looked through them along the road or when, while Adele played
with her nurse, and Mrs Fairfax made jellies in the storeroom, I climbed
the three staircases, raised the trap door of the attic, and having
reached the leads, looked out afar over sequestered field and hill, and
along dim sky line  that then I longed for a power of vision which might
overpass that limit which might reach the busy world, towns, regions
full of life I had heard of but never seen  that then I desired more of
practical experience than I possessed more of intercourse with my kind,
of acquaintance with variety of character, than was here within my reach.
I valued what was good in Mrs Fairfax, and what was good in Adel but I
believed in the existence of other and more vivid kinds of goodness, and
what I believed in I wished to behold.

Who blames me?  Many, no doubt and I shall be called discontented.  I
could not help it the restlessness was in my nature it agitated me to
pain sometimes.  Then my sole relief was to walk along the corridor of
the third storey, backwards and forwards, safe in the silence and
solitude of the spot, and allow my mind's eye to dwell on whatever bright
visions rose before it and, certainly, they were many and glowing to
let my heart be heaved by the exultant movement, which, while it swelled
it in trouble, expanded it with life and, best of all, to open my inward
ear to a tale that was never ended  a tale my imagination created, and
narrated continuously; quickened with all of incident, life, fire,
feeling, that I desired and had not in my actual existence.

It is in vain to say human beings ought to be satisfied with
tranquillity they must have action and they will make it if they cannot
find it.  Millions are condemned to a stiller doom than mine, and
millions are in silent revolt against their lot.  Nobody knows how many
rebellions besides political rebellions ferment in the masses of life
which people earth.  Women are supposed to be very calm generally but
women feel just as men feel they need exercise for their faculties, and
a field for their efforts, as much as their brothers do they suffer from
too rigid a restraint, too absolute a stagnation, precisely as men would
suffer and it is narrow minded in their more privileged fellow creatures
to say that they ought to confine themselves to making puddings and
knitting stockings, to playing on the piano and embroidering bags.  It is
thoughtless to condemn them, or laugh at them, if they seek to do more or
learn more than custom has pronounced necessary for their sex.

When thus alone, I not unfrequently heard Grace Poole's laugh: the same
peal, the same low, slow ha! ha! which, when first heard, had thrilled
me I heard, too, her eccentric murmurs; stranger than her laugh.  There
were days when she was quite silent but there were others when I could
not account for the sounds she made.  Sometimes I saw her: she would come
out of her room with a basin, or a plate, or a tray in her hand, go down
to the kitchen and shortly return, generally (oh, romantic reader,
forgive me for telling the plain truth!) bearing a pot of porter.  Her
appearance always acted as a damper to the curiosity raised by her oral
oddities hard featured and staid, she had no point to which interest
could attach.  I made some attempts to draw her into conversation, but
she seemed a person of few words a monosyllabic reply usually cut short
every effort of that sort.

The other members of the household, viz., John and his wife, Leah the
housemaid, and Sophie the French nurse, were decent people but in no
respect remarkable with Sophie I used to talk French, and sometimes I
asked her questions about her native country; but she was not of a
descriptive or narrative turn, and generally gave such vapid and confused
answers as were calculated rather to check than encourage inquiry.

October, November, December passed away.  One afternoon in January, Mrs.
Fairfax had begged a holiday for Adele, because she had a cold and, as
Adele seconded the request with an ardour that reminded me how precious
occasional holidays had been to me in my own childhood, I accorded it,
deeming that I did well in showing pliability on the point.  It was a
fine, calm day, though very cold I was tired of sitting still in the
library through a whole long morning Mrs. Fairfax had just written a
letter which was waiting to be posted, so I put on my bonnet and cloak
and volunteered to carry it to Hay the distance, two miles, would be a
pleasant winter afternoon walk.  Having seen Adele comfortably seated in
her little chair by Mrs. Fairfax's parlour fireside, and given her her
best wax doll (which I usually kept enveloped in silver paper in a
drawer) to play with, and a story book for change of amusement and
having replied to her Revenez bientot, ma bonne amie, ma chere Mdlle.
Jeannette, with a kiss I set out.

The ground was hard, the air was still, my road was lonely I walked fast
till I got warm, and then I walked slowly to enjoy and analyse the
species of pleasure brooding for me in the hour and situation.  It was
three o'clock the church bell tolled as I passed under the belfry: the
charm of the hour lay in its approaching dimness, in the low gliding and
pale beaming sun.  I was a mile from Thornfield, in a lane noted for wild
roses in summer, for nuts and blackberries in autumn, and even now
possessing a few coral treasures in hips and haws, but whose best winter
delight lay in its utter solitude and leafless repose.  If a breath of
air stirred, it made no sound here for there was not a holly, not an
evergreen to rustle, and the stripped hawthorn and hazel bushes were as
still as the white, worn stones which causewayed the middle of the path.
Far and wide, on each side, there were only fields, where no cattle now
Browsed and the little brown birds, which stirred occasionally in the
hedge, looked like single russet leaves that had forgotten to drop.

This lane inclined up hill all the way to Hay having reached the middle,
I sat down on a stile which led thence into a field.  Gathering my mantle
about me, and sheltering my hands in my muff, I did not feel the cold,
though it froze keenly as was attested by a sheet of ice covering the
causeway, where a little brooklet, now congealed, had overflowed after a
rapid thaw some days since.  From my seat I could look down on
Thornfield the grey and battlemented hall was the principal object in
the vale below me its woods and dark rookery rose against the west.  I
lingered till the sun went down amongst the trees, and sank crimson and
clear behind them.  I then turned eastward.

On the hill top above me sat the rising moon pale yet as a cloud, but
brightening momentarily, she looked over Hay, which, half lost in trees,
sent up a blue smoke from its few chimneys: it was yet a mile distant,
but in the absolute hush I could hear plainly its thin murmurs of life.
My ear, too, felt the flow of currents; in what dales and depths I could
not tell but there were many hills beyond Hay, and doubtless many becks
threading their passes.  That evening calm betrayed alike the tinkle of
the nearest streams, the sough of the most remote.

A rude noise broke on these fine rippling and whisperings, at once so
far away and so clear: a positive tramp, tramp, a metallic clatter, which
effaced the soft wave wanderings as, in a picture, the solid mass of a
crag, or the rough boles of a great oak, drawn in dark and strong on the
foreground, efface the aerial distance of azure hill, sunny horizon, and
blended clouds where tint melts into tint.

The din was on the causeway a horse was coming; the windings of the lane
yet hid it, but it approached.  I was just leaving the stile yet, as the
path was narrow, I sat still to let it go by.  In those days I was young,
and all sorts of fancies bright and dark tenanted my mind the memories
of nursery stories were there amongst other rubbish; and when they
recurred, maturing youth added to them a vigour and vividness beyond what
childhood could give.  As this horse approached, and as I watched for it
to appear through the dusk, I remembered certain of Bessie's tales,
wherein figured a North of England spirit called a Gytrash, which, in
the form of horse, mule, or large dog, haunted solitary ways, and
sometimes came upon belated travellers, as this horse was now coming upon
me.

It was very near, but not yet in sight when, in addition to the tramp,
tramp, I heard a rush under the hedge, and close down by the hazel stems
glided a great dog, whose black and white colour made him a distinct
object against the trees.  It was exactly one form of Bessie's Gytrash  a
lion like creature with long hair and a huge head: it passed me, however,
quietly enough not staying to look up, with strange pretercanine eyes,
in my face, as I half expected it would.  The horse followed,a tall
steed, and on its back a rider.  The man, the human being, broke the
spell at once.  Nothing ever rode the Gytrash: it was always alone; and
goblins, to my notions, though they might tenant the dumb carcasses of
beasts, could scarce covet shelter in the commonplace human form.  No
Gytrash was this, only a traveller taking the short cut to Millcote.  He
passed, and I went on; a few steps, and I turned: a sliding sound and an
exclamation of What the deuce is to do now? and a clattering tumble,
arrested my attention.  Man and horse were down; they had slipped on the
sheet of ice which glazed the causeway.  The dog came bounding back, and
seeing his master in a predicament, and hearing the horse groan, barked
till the evening hills echoed the sound, which was deep in proportion to
his magnitude.  He snuffed round the prostrate group, and then he ran up
to me it was all he could do,  there was no other help at hand to
summon.  I obeyed him, and walked down to the traveller, by this time
struggling himself free of his steed.  His efforts were so vigorous, I
thought he could not be much hurt but I asked him the question  

Are you injured, sir?

I think he was swearing, but am not certain; however, he was pronouncing
some formula which prevented him from replying to me directly.

Can I do anything? I asked again.

You must just stand on one side, he answered as he rose, first to his
knees, and then to his feet.  I did; whereupon began a heaving, stamping,
clattering process, accompanied by a barking and baying which removed me
effectually some yards' distance; but I would not be driven quite away
till I saw the event.  This was finally fortunate; the horse was
re established, and the dog was silenced with a Down, Pilot!  The
traveller now, stooping, felt his foot and leg, as if trying whether they
were sound apparently something ailed them, for he halted to the stile
whence I had just risen, and sat down.

I was in the mood for being useful, or at least officious, I think, for I
now drew near him again.

If you are hurt, and want help, sir, I can fetch some one either from
Thornfield Hall or from Hay.

Thank you I shall do I have no broken bones,  only a sprain and
again he stood up and tried his foot, but the result extorted an
involuntary Ugh!

Something of daylight still lingered, and the moon was waxing bright: I
could see him plainly.  His figure was enveloped in a riding cloak, fur
collared and steel clasped its details were not apparent, but I traced
the general points of middle height and considerable breadth of chest.  He
had a dark face, with stern features and a heavy brow; his eyes and
gathered eyebrows looked ireful and thwarted just now; he was past youth,
but had not reached middle age; perhaps he might be thirty five.  I felt
no fear of him, and but little shyness.  Had he been a handsome, heroic 
looking young gentleman, I should not have dared to stand thus
questioning him against his will, and offering my services unasked.  I
had hardly ever seen a handsome youth; never in my life spoken to one.  I
had a theoretical reverence and homage for beauty, elegance, gallantry,
fascination; but had I met those qualities incarnate in masculine shape,
I should have known instinctively that they neither had nor could have
sympathy with anything in me, and should have shunned them as one would
fire, lightning, or anything else that is bright but antipathetic.

If even this stranger had smiled and been good humoured to me when I
addressed him if he had put off my offer of assistance gaily and with
thanks, I should have gone on my way and not felt any vocation to renew
inquiries but the frown, the roughness of the traveller, set me at my
ease: I retained my station when he waved to me to go, and announced  

I cannot think of leaving you, sir, at so late an hour, in this solitary
lane, till I see you are fit to mount your horse.

He looked at me when I said this; he had hardly turned his eyes in my
direction before.

I should think you ought to be at home yourself, said he, if you have
a home in this neighbourhood: where do you come from?

From just below; and I am not at all afraid of being out late when it is
moonlight I will run over to Hay for you with pleasure, if you wish it
indeed, I am going there to post a letter.

You live just below do you mean at that house with the battlements?
pointing to Thornfield Hall, on which the moon cast a hoary gleam,
bringing it out distinct and pale from the woods that, by contrast with
the western sky, now seemed one mass of shadow.

Yes, sir.

Whose house is it?

Mr. Rochester's.

Do you know Mr. Rochester?

No, I have never seen him.

He is not resident, then?

No.

Can you tell me where he is?

I cannot.

You are not a servant at the hall, of course.  You are  He stopped,
ran his eye over my dress, which, as usual, was quite simple a black
merino cloak, a black beaver bonnet neither of them half fine enough for
a lady's maid.  He seemed puzzled to decide what I was; I helped him.

I am the governess.

Ah, the governess! he repeated deuce take me, if I had not forgotten!
The governess! and again my raiment underwent scrutiny.  In two minutes
he rose from the stile: his face expressed pain when he tried to move.

I cannot commission you to fetch help, he said but you may help me a
little yourself, if you will be so kind.

Yes, sir.

You have not an umbrella that I can use as a stick?

No.

Try to get hold of my horse's bridle and lead him to me you are not
afraid?

I should have been afraid to touch a horse when alone, but when told to
do it, I was disposed to obey.  I put down my muff on the stile, and went
up to the tall steed; I endeavoured to catch the bridle, but it was a
spirited thing, and would not let me come near its head I made effort on
effort, though in vain meantime, I was mortally afraid of its trampling
fore feet.  The traveller waited and watched for some time, and at last
he laughed.


I see, he said, the mountain will never be brought to Mahomet, so all
you can do is to aid Mahomet to go to the mountain; I must beg of you to
come here.

I came.  Excuse me, he continued necessity compels me to make you
useful.  He laid a heavy hand on my shoulder, and leaning on me with
some stress, limped to his horse.  Having once caught the bridle, he
mastered it directly and sprang to his saddle grimacing grimly as he
made the effort, for it wrenched his sprain.

Now, said he, releasing his under lip from a hard bite, just hand me
my whip it lies there under the hedge.

I sought it and found it.

Thank you now make haste with the letter to Hay, and return as fast as
you can.

A touch of a spurred heel made his horse first start and rear, and then
bound away the dog rushed in his traces; all three vanished,


I took up my muff and walked on. The incident had occurred and was gone
for me it was an incident of no moment, no romance, no interest in a
sense yet it marked with change one single hour of a monotonous life.  My
help had been needed and claimed I had given it I was pleased to have
done something trivial, transitory though the deed was, it was yet an
active thing, and I was weary of an existence all passive.  The new face,
too, was like a new picture introduced to the gallery of memory and it
was dissimilar to all the others hanging there firstly, because it was
masculine and, secondly, because it was dark, strong, and stern.  I had
it still before me when I entered Hay, and slipped the letter into the
post office; I saw it as I walked fast down hill all the way home.  When
I came to the stile, I stopped a minute, looked round and listened, with
an idea that a horse's hoofs might ring on the causeway again, and that a
rider in a cloak, and a Gytrash like Newfoundland dog, might be again
apparent I saw only the hedge and a pollard willow before me, rising up
still and straight to meet the moonbeams I heard only the faintest waft
of wind roaming fitful among the trees round Thornfield, a mile distant
and when I glanced down in the direction of the murmur, my eye,
traversing the hall front, caught a light kindling in a window: it
reminded me that I was late, and I hurried on.

I did not like re entering Thornfield.  To pass its threshold was to
return to stagnation to cross the silent hall, to ascend the darksome
staircase, to seek my own lonely little room, and then to meet tranquil
Mrs. Fairfax, and spend the long winter evening with her, and her only,
was to quell wholly the faint excitement wakened by my walk,to slip
again over my faculties the viewless fetters of an uniform and too still
existence of an existence whose very privileges of security and ease I
was becoming incapable of appreciating.  What good it would have done me
at that time to have been tossed in the storms of an uncertain struggling
life, and to have been taught by rough and bitter experience to long for
the calm amidst which I now repined!  Yes, just as much good as it would
do a man tired of sitting still in a too easy chair to take a long
walk: and just as natural was the wish to stir, under my circumstances,
as it would be under his.

I lingered at the gates I lingered on the lawn; I paced backwards and
forwards on the pavement the shutters of the glass door were closed I
could not see into the interior and both my eyes and spirit seemed drawn
from the gloomy house from the grey hollow filled with rayless cells, as
it appeared to me to that sky expanded before me, a blue sea absolved
from taint of cloud the moon ascending it in solemn march; her orb
seeming to look up as she left the hill tops, from behind which she had
come, far and farther below her, and aspired to the zenith, midnight dark
in its fathomless depth and measureless distance; and for those trembling
stars that followed her course; they made my heart tremble, my veins glow
when I viewed them.  Little things recall us to earth the clock struck
in the hall that sufficed; I turned from moon and stars, opened a side 
door, and went in.

The hall was not dark, nor yet was it lit, only by the high hung bronze
lamp a warm glow suffused both it and the lower steps of the oak
staircase.  This ruddy shine issued from the great dining room, whose two 
leaved door stood open, and showed a genial fire in the grate, glancing
on marble hearth and brass fire irons, and revealing purple draperies and
polished furniture, in the most pleasant radiance.  It revealed, too, a
group near the mantelpiece I had scarcely caught it, and scarcely become
aware of a cheerful mingling of voices, amongst which I seemed to
distinguish the tones of Adele, when the door closed.

I hastened to Mrs Fairfax's room; there was a fire there too, but no
candle, and no Mrs Fairfax.  Instead, all alone, sitting upright on the
rug, and gazing with gravity at the blaze, I beheld a great black and
white long haired dog, just like the Gytrash of the lane.  It was so like
it that I went forward and said Pilot and the thing got up and came to
me and snuffed me.  I caressed him, and he wagged his great tail but he
looked an eerie creature to be alone with, and I could not tell whence he
had come.  I rang the bell, for I wanted a candle and I wanted, too, to
get an account of this visitant. Leah entered.

What dog is this?

He came with master.

With whom?

With master Mr. Rochester he is just arrived.

Indeed! and is Mrs Fairfax with him?

Yes, and Miss Adele; they are in the dining room, and John is gone for a
surgeon for master has had an accident his horse fell and his ankle is
sprained.

Did the horse fall in Hay Lane?

Yes, coming down hill; it slipped on some ice.

Ah!  Bring me a candle will you Leah?

Leah brought it; she entered, followed by Mrs Fairfax, who repeated the
news adding that Mr Carter the surgeon was come, and was now with Mr
Rochester then she hurried out to give orders about tea, and I went
upstairs to take off my things.






Mr. Rochester, it seems, by the surgeon's orders, went to bed early that
night nor did he rise soon next morning.  When he did come down, it was
to attend to business his agent and some of his tenants were arrived,
and waiting to speak with him.

Adele and I had now to vacate the library: it would be in daily
requisition as a reception room for callers.  A fire was lit in an
apartment upstairs, and there I carried our books, and arranged it for
the future schoolroom.  I discerned in the course of the morning that
Thornfield Hall was a changed place no longer silent as a church, it
echoed every hour or two to a knock at the door, or a clang of the bell
steps, too, often traversed the hall, and new voices spoke in different
keys below a rill from the outer world was flowing through it; it had a
master: for my part, I liked it better.

Adele was not easy to teach that day; she could not apply: she kept
running to the door and looking over the banisters to see if she could
get a glimpse of Mr. Rochester; then she coined pretexts to go
downstairs, in order, as I shrewdly suspected, to visit the library,
where I knew she was not wanted then, when I got a little angry, and
made her sit still, she continued to talk incessantly of her ami,
Monsieur Edouard Fairfax de Rochester, as she dubbed him (I had not
before heard his prenomens), and to conjecture what presents he had
brought her for it appears he had intimated the night before, that when
his luggage came from Millcote, there would be found amongst it a little
box in whose contents she had an interest.


I and my pupil dined as usual in Mrs Fairfax's parlour the afternoon
was wild and snowy, and we passed it in the schoolroom.  At dark I
allowed Adele to put away books and work, and to run downstairs; for,
from the comparative silence below, and from the cessation of appeals to
the door bell, I conjectured that Mr Rochester was now at liberty.  Left
alone, I walked to the window but nothing was to be seen thence
twilight and snowflakes together thickened the air, and hid the very
shrubs on the lawn.  I let down the curtain and went back to the
fireside.


